Good day i'm norman Wildlberger in this video
we're going to look at quadratic and cubic
equations we're going to look at the classical
formulas for both of those and then we're going
to have a look at how newton's method involving
tangent lines and successive approximations
tackles general cubics and quadratics so along the
way we'll touch base with of course the standard
very familiar quadratic formula but also a much
less well-known formula but still of very great
importance historically the formula of tartaglio
del ferro and cardano for the general cubic
all right let's start with the quadratic
equation which of course is very familiar
and we've already talked about that in math
foundations 48. so let me remind you that if we
have any equation ax squared plus bx plus c equals
0 and a is not equal to 0 then that's a quadratic
equation and if we want to solve for x we don't
know what x might be then here's the standard
manipulations that yield the classical formula
this process is called completing the square
so we bring the c to the other side we take
out a factor of a so there's a b over a here
as the coefficient of x and then we might as
well divide by a to get that on the other side
so we have a minus c over a on the other side and
then to this thing here we add a particular term
which is obtained by taking this coefficient
here dividing it by 2 and squaring it to keep the
equation the same we do that on both sides so we
add that term on both sides then this is a perfect
square this simplifies to b squared minus 4ac over
4a squared so this thing squared equals this and
then the usual thing is to say well let's take a
square root so the square root of 4a squared is 2a
then we have a minus b over 2a when
we bring this part to the other side
and plus or minus the square root of this
numerator here which is b squared minus 4ac
that's the familiar formula that all
high school students learn off by heart
now this formula is in some sense a fake
formula because of this square root here
the square root presents significant
problems for us first of all sometimes
what's inside here is negative number and then
the solution doesn't make sense unless we first
establish the more general theory of complex
numbers but historically for many years that
was not available and so people would have
just said well there's no solution in that case
but even if this is positive it still might not
be a square for example this might be 2 inside
here and then we're talking about something like
the square root of 2 involved with these other
numbers and since square root of 2 is
problematic so is this kind of expression here
if we go back one step to this one here
then it's possible to rewrite things in a
somewhat more honest logical way what happens
really is that this side being a square
this must also be a square in order for there to
be a solution now the bottom is already a square
because it's the square of 2a so this really
only has a solution when b squared minus 4ac is
a square that way the left hand side and the right
hand side are both squares and things make sense
so this only has a solution if b squared minus 4ac
is a square in other words of the form r squared
for some number r and whenever i say number in
this context we're talking about rational numbers
okay now if b squared minus 4ac equals r
squared then when we proceed in the same
way as we did to get the formula then
what's inside here will be an r squared
and what we're really talking about is plus
or minus r in that case the square root of r
squared does make sense we're really just talking
about r so the formula becomes x equals this or
more simply minus b plus or minus r over 2a this
is more of a true formula and i wish high school
students were taught the quadratic formula
this way so if you're teaching high school
this is what you should tell your
students you have an equation like this
it has a solution precisely when b squared minus
4ac is a square then there's a solution and if
that b squared minus 4ac is r squared then the
two solutions are minus b plus or minus r over 2a
if b squared minus 4 ac is not a square then there
is no exact solution but there still might be
approximate solutions so as long as this
thing is positive we can find numbers r which
maybe don't square exactly to this
number but which approximately do
and so that's the interpretation
of the formula in that case
it's minus b plus or minus an approximate
square root to b squared minus 4ac over 2a
if we interpret this to mean a number which
has the property that if you square it you
approximately get b squared minus
4ac then it makes reasonable sense
many centuries ago when european mathematicians
were starting to flex their mathematical muscles
it was a common practice to offer challenges to
your fellow mathematicians often arithmetical
challenges to see if they could solve them
a quadratic equation would have been pretty
simple because quadratic equations well they've
been solved back in the time of the ancient
chinese the ancient indians the arabs they all
knew how to solve quadratic equations they all
had some version of the quadratic formula but
nevertheless let's illustrate the point by
cooking up a quadratic equation that we might
be able to challenge somebody with if they
didn't know the quadratic formula for example we
could take a number say 63 somewhat randomly and
let's take an expression which is quadratic in x
let's take x squared minus say randomly 38 times
x you can compute that 63 squared minus 38 times
63 work that out that turns out to be 1575.
so we know that x equals 63
satisfies this quadratic equation
now this particular quadratic equation we know it
has a integer solution because we've cooked it up
to have an integer solution what would happen if
we applied the standard quadratic formula on it
well there's the minus uh 38
with a minus sign becomes 38
plus or minus the square root of 38 squared
minus 4 times this so all together plus
4 times 1575. and what's inside the square
root becomes 7 744 now it turns out that 7 744
is a perfect square in fact it sort of has to be
because we know we have to get an integer solution
out of this so this had better be something that
actually is an integer in fact the square root
is exactly 88 so the two solutions are 38 plus or
minus 88 over 2. one of those you get with a plus
sign gives you 63 the other one with the minus
sign gives you minus 25. so those are the two
solutions so in this case the square root of 7
744 has a proper meaning since 7 744 is a square
but if we change this just a little bit if we
changed it to one less or one more well then
this no longer would have um a solution so if we
changed any of these numbers just a little bit
then almost surely the equation that we would
get would have a dramatically different nature
it would have a dramatically
different nature and this
what's under here would not be a perfect square
and we would not be able to solve that exactly
it's like a night and day different type
of situation we would then only be able to
find a square root approximately using essentially
newton's method or something equivalent say the
vedic algorithm now i want to use this problem
of solving a quadratic equation to illustrate
that newton's method as i've explained it so far
is capable of some interesting generalizations
so we're going to generalize
it just a little bit right now
let's consider this particular equation x squared
equals 4 minus x so that's a quadratic equation
and in the form that it's written here we have
a left-hand side and the right-hand side so we
don't have everything on one side like we
did for the other quadratic equation this
suggests that there is some geometry here that's
represented by one curve here and one curve here
and in fact it's possible to interpret this
equation as trying to find the intersection
of two curves one of them x squared and the other
one the line four minus x in terms of polynomials
or poly numbers we're talking about p equals
alpha squared say and q equals 4 minus alpha
now this line here this green one is not a
horizontal line like we've been considering before
but nevertheless newton's method works still quite
well on it so let me just run by that and show you
how that goes i remind you this is the formula for
the tangent line to the conic y equals x squared
and a point r somewhere so if r is say this
one right here then the corresponding point
on the conic is that one there and the tangent
line to the conic at that point is given by this
polynomial and i'm using alpha here almost
interchangeably with x so if we want to find
out where this tangent line meets this green line
we're talking about where this tangent line meets
the line 4 minus x and it will do so at some
point whose coordinates are alpha 4 minus alpha
where alpha is the solution to this
equation here where we just set the
equation of the tangent equal to the equation
of the line so we're looking to see which alpha
or x value makes this equation satisfied
that's finding that intersection
well we can bring the alphas to one side
and everything else to the other side so
four plus r squared on that side and then on
the alphas over here we'd have alpha times
one plus two r so when we divide by that we get
alpha equals 4 plus r squared over 1 plus 2r
and that gives us a new value of r let's say r
prime so this is a way of successively finding
approximations using newton's method it's very
similar as to what we've been doing before
except that now we're looking to see
where it meets some more general line
so there will be the first approximation let's
say r1 then you compute this thing here and
then you get second value r2 maybe up there and
then the next level we would look to see what
the tangent line at that point is right here
and where it meets the green line and continue
so here's one case of a sequence of such
approximate values where we start with r one
equals one so if r1 equals one then at the next
stage if we plug r equals one in here we're gonna
get five over three and then at the next stage
when we plug five over three in there we're gonna
get 61 over 39 and then 9805 over 6279 and then
this number here and we can keep going and these
are values that we're getting are getting
closer and closer to satisfying this equation
although we never actually get a number which
satisfies this equation so what do we get when we
apply the quadratic formula well we can bring
everything to one side first of all to get
x squared plus x minus four equals zero and
then the solution is minus this coefficient
here which is one minus one plus or minus r over
two where r squared equals b squared minus 4ac
1 plus 4 times 4 or 17. so that's the solution
to the quadratic equation that i would
like to see high school students start writing
this is a logically clear and correct statement
okay so there's a solution as long as you can
solve this equation r squared equals 17. if you
can solve that equation then you get a solution
if you can't solve that equation you're not going
to get a solution if you can solve this equation
approximately then you get an approximate solution
if you can't even solve this approximately
you can't even get an approximate
solution to that quadratic okay so 17 is not
a square so there is no exact solution but 17
is positive so approximate square roots of 17
exist for example if you take your calculator
and you ask it what is square root of 17 it will
give you an approximate square root say 4.123106
then it stops so we can plug that into
here and then we get two solutions x equals
minus two point five six one five five three or
x equals one point five six one five five three
and we have to recognize that those are
not exact solutions of this quadratic
they are approximate solutions because we're
starting with an approximate square root of 17.
now it's also possible to use newton's
method directly on this quadratic of course
that means we could think about plotting this
function the function x squared plus x minus four
or better yet the polynomial alpha
squared plus alpha minus four
so here's my rather crude attempt at graphing
it i've plotted a few points and joined the dots
and now what we're doing is we're trying to find
where this graph meets the x-axis value there or
perhaps a value there so as an exercise you
can try to use newton's method directly on this
quadratic to find the approximate zeros
of course you should end up with something
that pretty close to to those values there these
are the values that we're finding approximately
so now let's have a look at cubic equations which
is an interesting chapter of mathematics and
started really a whole important trend in in
algebra even though the actual cubic equation
that i'm just about to show you turned out
to be something of a dead end didn't actually
lead to the breakthroughs that its discoverers had
hoped so what's going on here what we're talking
about a general cubic equation say x cubed
plus a x squared plus b x plus c equals 0.
now you might say well this is not quite general
because i don't have an arbitrary coefficient
of x cubed and that's quite correct so what
i've done is i've divided by that arbitrary
coefficient which is non-zero just to simplify
the formula so there are fewer coefficients around
so the question is how do we write down a
formula for this that allows us to find solutions
if we're given a particular cubic
equation in other words we know
exact values for a b and c how do you find
some formula for x which will involve a b and c
all right so this problem was solved in the 1500s
by well a combination of the number of people
uh italians del ferro tartaglia and cardano and
there was quite a lot of dispute of priority and
sort of interesting characters here and this story
is told a little bit in my math history 6 lecture
so here roughly is what ends up happening
we first make a simplifying substitution to
simplify the equation if you replace x with
y minus a over 3 and this a is exactly this
coefficient of x squared here divided by
3. then it turns out that you plug that in
and you expand using the binomial formula and
you collect terms that there is then no more
y squared term so you get a formula that only
involves y cubes y and a constant term so we can
rewrite it by bringing the other stuff to the
other side as y cubed equals p times y plus q
and p and q are numbers that are related
in a reasonably uh decent way to a b and c
so once we have a solution to this then we
can get a solution to the original equation
through this substitution here okay so then
there's a very clever kind of trick that was
discovered well maybe it was discovered
by del pharo but certainly by tartaglia
and then he revealed it to cardano who then
published it and the trick ends up allowing
you to write down a formula like this
and this is this is the cubic formula
so let's have a look at it it's telling
us what y is in terms of this number p
and this number q so there's a cubed root of q
over two so this constant term divided by two
plus a square root and what's inside the square
root is the difference between q over two
all squared and p over 3 all cubed so
the 2 in the denominator goes with the
2 in the exponent there this 3 in the
denominator goes with that 3 in the exponent
so we have to take all of that and
then we take the cube root of that
and then there's another term which is just like
that except that there's a minus sign here between
these two terms instead of a plus sign so if we
know q and we know p and we're good at taking
square roots and cube roots well then
we can write an expression down for y
and if i call the quadratic formula something
of a fake formula well this one is also
going to be a fake formula because
we've just said it involves square roots
and cube roots and in general those things
don't exist unless you choose things very
carefully the numbers that inside
are inside here are not going to be
perfect squares and then the numbers that you
get inside here are not going to be perfect cubes
so necessarily this is really only a way of
getting towards some kind of approximate solution
unless of course we work in some extension
field we take an algebraic point of view which
is always another option but that's a little
bit more advanced so the usual interpretation
is we're talking about ordinary numbers on the
ordinary line and unfortunately what we get here
generally is non-existent let's have a look at an
example so here's an example to see how this cubic
formula works we're going to cook up first of
all a cubic equation whose solution we know
so we're going to start with the
solution let's say randomly x
equals 47 and then we're going to just
cook up a cubic equation that 47 satisfies
so i'm going to randomly compute x cubed
minus 36 times x squared minus 405 x and
i chose those numbers more or less at random and
i compute that with x equals 47 and i get 5264.
so now i can give you this equation and
say what is x can you figure out what x is
this is the kind of thing that those 16th
century mathematicians like to do like to
challenge each other with problems like this well
we saw that the first thing that that one does
is to try to make a simplification so that instead
of having three numbers involved there are really
only two numbers involved and the simplification
is x equals y plus 12. why twelve because it's
one third of or minus one third of this uh 36 here
so 36 over three with a minus sign there's a 12.
so when we plug x equals y plus 12 into here
expand it all out then that can be rewritten as
y cubed equals 837 y plus 13 580. the numbers get
a little bit bigger it's the price you pay for
having made some simplification
having no quadratic term
so now we're just in the position where we can
apply that previous formula this is the p and
this is the q so we have a cube root of here
is q over 2 and here is q over 2 squared minus
p over 3 cubed and then the same kind
of term but with a minus sign here
so one can work out what this is this is
something squared minus something cubed
so we make the arithmetic and then we
look at that number and say well can we
can we find the square root well we can certainly
pull out some quadratic factors so we can write
this as 473 times square root of 109 and so
then we have the cubed root of 6790 plus 473
times the square root of 109 plus the cube root
of 6790 minus 473 times the square root of 109
so that's the solution that the
formula the cubic formula gives us
now it turns out that if you
compute this with a calculator
which of course is just using approximate
values for here and then it will use
approximate values for the cube root you get
35.000 suggesting that the answer really is 35.
in fact we're not surprised by that because we
started with x equals 47 and if x is 47 then y has
got to be 47 minus 12 which is 35. so in fact 35
is an exact solution to this equation and that's
the number that's being obtained here but you
can see that something remarkable is happening
that this thing here doesn't obviously simplify
easily this thing here obviously doesn't simplify
easily but somehow miraculously the sum
of these two turns out to be 35 so there's
some very subtle algebra going on here between
these cubed roots and the nested square roots
and that to me is in fact the most surprising
thing about this cubic formula this interesting
interplay that we get in fact the situation is
even more complicated in certain situations what's
inside these square roots here can be negative and
you may even have a honest down to earth solution
but you have to go through complex numbers to
get at it so you have to widen your your arena
to complex numbers even if you started off with a
very explicit perfectly reasonable integer value
now this whole solution here depends very much
on the fact that we started with an equation
which we already know has a solution if we change
this 5264 to something randomly close say 5262
well then you can go through the same motions
and you get the cubic formula spitting this out
cube root of 6789 plus 93 times the square root of
2818 and plus the cubed root of the same
thing minus 93 times square root of 2818.
but the difference between this expression
and this expression is like the difference
between night and day here there is an exact
value that this actually can be interpreted as
how may be not so clear but it can ultimately
be given a concrete interpretation but here
the solution is only obtainable numerically
approximately so we don't actually get this
number this is some kind of optical illusion here
presenting it as if it's already there on a plate
it's not on a plate this is just a recipe for a
procedure that you can carry on and you can churn
out as many digits as you have patience with and
technology for but ultimately you're never going
to be able to get the whole thing let's have a
look at how newton's method would tackle that same
cubic equation so here's that same equation
i've rewritten it with x's instead of y's
to make it a little bit more familiar so
x cubed equals 837 times x plus 13 580.
all right this is not a accurate picture of this
but one interpretation of this is to say all
right we have two curves here on the left hand
side we have the familiar x cubed curve looks
something like this and on the right hand side
we have a linear equation in other words a line
so in terms of poly numbers alpha cubed on this
side and over here 837 alpha plus 13 580 which
is a line maybe something like this going through
the y coordinate 13 580 and having some positive
slope so it increases and our job is to find
where this line meets our basic cubic x cubed
okay well newton's method allows us to tackle
this kind of question even though again this
is not a horizontal line as it was in our
earlier attempts still the basic idea works
we can still make an approximation start with
some approximate value r here look at the point
on the curve compute the tangent and then see
where that tangent line meets this green line
and then drop down that's going to be your new
approximate value and you then you carry on
you iterate starting with that new value and
hopefully these values are r1 r2 r3 and so
on will more and more approximate a solution
so i remind you that the formula for the
tangent line to the polynomial alpha cubed
is at the point r minus two r cubed plus three r
squared alpha so that's a linear polynomial that's
the tangent line and that will meet the line this
one here at some point say alpha equals r prime
where we get the alpha by solving this set equal
to this so there's the tangent line we set it
equal to the green line we're trying to solve
for alpha fortunately alpha only appears linearly
that's because we have two lines intersection
of two lines it's always a linear equation
and we solve this in the obvious
way we get everything without
alphas on one side bring all the alphas to the
other side so we end up with thirteen thousand
five hundred and eighty plus two r cubed on
this side and then the coefficient of alpha was
a three r squared minus eight 3 7 and when we
divide by that we get the formula for alpha
so this is a way of going from r to the next
approximation let's call it r prime so you compute
this expression with an r cubed in the numerator
there on r squared in the denominator there and
that steps you one step at a time towards finding
a place where x cubed and this line meet in other
words towards the solution of this cubic so if we
start with an initial guess of say r1 equals 30
then that recursion that we wrote down on the last
sheet means that the next r2 will end up being
this value here 67 580 over 1863 and then when you
use this plug it into the same formula well then
the next value is this one here which i won't read
off but i will tell you that it's approximately in
terms of your calculator it's 35.056 and so on
so that means we're getting pretty close to 35
and if you iterate a few more you're
going to get closer and closer to 35
but in this case newton's method does
not know that there is an exact solution
so newton's method is not a method that will
get an exact solution for you necessarily if
it exists newton's method always just gives us
a procedure step by step by step that gives us
closer and closer and closer to a solution
to whatever equation we're looking for
i'm spending a lot more time on
newton's method than a standard
calculus course would because i think
it's particularly important application
of the derivative or better yet the
idea of tangent lines and tangent conics
it's also very important in practice in the sense
that this is an algorithm that computes solutions
to equations for us at least approximately and
so that's a main business of mathematics in fact
but i'm also telling you about it in some
detail because i want you to appreciate
that newton's method does not solve equations
exactly in fact i want you to appreciate that in
general equations cannot be solved exactly they
can be if we cook up the equation specifically
in order to have a solution so yes
some equations do have exact solutions
but your average ordinary run-of-the-mill equation
if it's at all a little bit complicated chances
are you won't be able to solve it not exactly but
approximately you can still have a good chance
i'd like to think about extending newton's
method to dealing with algebraic curves not
just functions or polynomials where we have y
equals some polynomial of x but what happens
if we have two algebraic curves for example a
folium and a laminoscape or maybe an ellipse a
second degree equation a conic section so here you
can see this ellipse meets the lemon state in four
points at least approximately so we can ask
if we have an equation for that ellipse if
we have an equation for the laminar state how
what might we be able to find these values at
least approximately or same thing with the folium
and the lemniscape or the folium and the ellipse
at first it seems as if newton's method is not
going to work here because newton's method was
involving having a kind of a functional approach
that we have a value of r on the x-axis and then
we go up we compute the function's value
at r or the polynomial's value at r because
we've only been talking about polynomials and
then we look at the tangent line at that point
however it is true that we
can calculate tangent lines
to these algebraic curves at any old
point that we like we know how to do
that so maybe we can still exploit the fact
that we can compute tangent lines to somehow
apply newton's method or generalize
newton's method to this situation
so next time i'm going to talk about this and
i'm going to show you a way of thinking about
the algebraic curves about newton's method
that generalizes it to this situation
it goes back to our earlier interpretation
of what is an algebraic curve
you may remember i said that there were a number
of different interpretations there was sort of
an interpretation a where we thought of
an algebraic curve like this as actually
a picture a set of points or a you know a
curve in the plane but then there was also
interpretation b where we thought of it rather in
a bigger way as a sort of a slice of of a surface
and there were some advantages to looking at
things in terms of that interpretation be and this
will be a good application of that more general
way of thinking or at least higher dimensional
way of thinking so i hope you'll join me for
that i'm norman Wildberger thanks for listening
you